---
title: Havisham
---
## [[Carol Ann Duffy]]
### Background
#### She was one of the first LGBT writer and poets to receive the honorary position of poet laureate in the British court. She is original of Scottish background and she is the first Scottish women to be the poet laureate. Her dates her 1955 -. She is well known for her diction and style which jars, attracts and stimulates our attraction at the same time - it revolves and appeals. This duality seeks to grab the reader almost by the solar plexus and create indelible imageries.
## **The title**
### The title is a direct allusion to "Great expectations" by [[Charles Dicksons]] where Havisham is a tragic character, denied happiness in life because she has been jilted by her fiance. Throughout the novel, she is the denizen of dark and dismal/gloomy room - this room is spectacularly grotesque because she has tried to preserve all the items of celebration which would have marked a successful wedding. Thus the wedding cake still finds a place of pride on her table, rotting and melting, grainy and dusty yet still preserved in all its inglorious shape. Spiders are the visitors to this strange room creating fabulously prolific webs in and around the room, up and above the cake and Miss Havisham. Miss Havisham herself remains dressed in the wedding gown as if caught and frozen in time when her life could have reached its romantic fulfilment. Instead, the years of waiting, the years of dejection have turned her into a bitter soul intend on rocking vengeance and seeking retribution for the crimes of her lover. By association, all men are tainted in her eyes, she firmly believes that any relationship with a man would lead to heartbreak and betrayal. She brings out a beautiful girl in her household, Estella with the maccared intent of breaking the heart of men, with a beauty and charm - thereby seeking justice for the crime that had been committed on her. Through the perspective of [[Carol Ann Duffy]], Havisham stands as a statues representation of grief, torment and vendetta whereby the jilted women strike back at the patriarchal society which has systematically oppressed her.
### It is interesting that [[Carol Ann Duffy]] uses the only Havisham in her title, she does not use the declension "Miss Havisham" as it becomes gender-specific - the plight of Havisham as depicted in [[Carol Ann Duffy]]'s home might be representative of the sorrows of the human soul, the inability to transcend the horror of betrayal and go on with ordinary life as is represented in the titular character.
##
## Part 1: Summary
### The poet strikes a jarring note at the very onset of the poem; the epithet, "Beloved sweetheart bastard", provide a strange note of thesis and antithesis. It is also an apostrophe because she is essentially addressing who is actually not physically present in the room. Seen from the perspective of Miss Havisham, this epithet for the lover who has jilted Havisham on her wedding day and create an intriguing mindscape wherein she connects him to the sensation of purest love as reflected in the words "beloved sweetheart", yet this is juxtaposed with intense animosity and hatred indicated by the word "bastard". Thus at the very same moment that she reveals the immensity of her love, she also revealed the darkness of her hatred.
### [[Carol Ann Duffy]] portrays idiomatic usage which has come down to us from times in memorial "Hell has no fury like a women's scorn". Thereby Havisham represents in herself both love and hatred and becomes eventual nemesis who targets men as betraying creatures. Her heartbreak with an individual man develops into a generic hatred of making which is what makes the opening line both shocking and appealing.
### The point of view is that of a betrayed lady - the words emerged from a stream of consciousness narrative, a monologue which takes place in the mind of the central character who speaks about the tournaments in her soul that she has experienced since the day she has been jilted. "Not a day since then" indicates the pathos of a mind which is caught in an almost post lapidarian state from the joys of heavenly bliss that she had expected from her marriage to the hellish pain of rejection and suffering which she eventually exposed to. Stylistically [[Carol Ann Duffy]] captures the imagination of the reader exposing him or her to the pleasure/pain situation.
## ***Beloved sweetheart bastard. Not a day since then***
### The very first line has the instance of [[juxterposition]], and [[cesura]] (the dramatic pause marked by the full stop after the "bastard") which is always followed by an enjambment - "Not a day since then" marking how she has changed and evolved from a joyous bride with millions of expectations from life into a cantankerous old woman, skeletal deprived of the joys of life, hard-hearted and vindictive.
## ***I haven’t wished him dead. Prayed for it***
### Rejection has essentially been a reversal of fortune for Havisham, and when she looks back to the figure of her beloved she can not erase the hatred from the memory of love. In fact, she owns up to the idea that she has often wished in dead and prayed for his death. "Prayed" is in capital letters and does point out the hatred to reach out to the Mercyful Creator God, who would be able to deliver her out of this pain by eliminating its source - she also acknowledges the fact that her own efforts might be futile, hence she invests faith in higher powers to see justice implemented on Earth. The dismal note is highlighted by horrific images wherein she literally compares her eyes with "green pebbles", symbolically, her eyes which had shed tears of pity and sorrow for years on end have lost their power to cry any more: the ineffectively of tears has made her "hard" and this effect has been used to compare her eyes to "pebbles". She herself has turned to stone devoid of pity, mercy and sorrow and any human emotion except for retribution.
## ***so hard I’ve dark green pebbles for eyes,***
### The "green pebbles" might also signify the jealousy Havisham feels for the more fortunate who are happy in their lives being married securely and parenting children. "green" is also the colour of the decaying atmosphere around her, the mouldy cake, the age-old moss which has gathered around the room as she sits in the gloomy green darkness her eyes have turned to stone. They are like pebbles which she wants to through at the rest of the world to hurt them just like she herself has been hurt.
## ***ropes on the back of my hands I could strangle with.***
### "ropes on the back of my hands" are striking visual imagery indicating the nerves which are standing out in the near skeletal hands of Havisham. They appear like ropes because she has still not been able to cut herself out of the pathetic situation she is in. She might stand a figure of suffering but has little power to end it all. The imagery of ropes is directly connected to strangle, her intense desire to appear as the hand man who will use the ropes and fashion it into a noose to hang the person who has jilted her. She lives for vendetta, she lives the life of a doomed person associated with all the negative passions of life, yet who can challenge her - she represents millions of women betrayed and scorned by men through times in memorial.
##
## ***Spinster. I stink and remember. Whole days***
## ***in bed cawing Nooooo at the wall; the dress***
## ***yellowing, trembling if I open the wardrobe;***
## ***the slewed mirror, full-length, her, myself, who did this***
##
## ***to me? Puce curses that are sounds not words.***
## ***Some nights better, the lost body over me,***
## ***my fluent tongue in its mouth in its ear***
## ***then down till I suddenly bite awake. Love’s***
##
## ***hate behind a white veil; a red balloon bursting***
## ***in my face. Bang. I stabbed at a wedding cake.***
## ***Give me a male corpse for a long slow honeymoon.***
## ***Don’t think it’s only the heart that b-b-b-breaks.***
